Smith interactive reliability report — 2026-10-09 (Europe/Lisbon)

Result

The requested workflow now passes through the shipped Smith binary using
Codex authentication, gpt-6-luna, and medium reasoning effort. In one terminal
invocation, a copy of the original saved chat received "how are you?", answered,
then received a request to run the project's checks. Smith actually executed:

  cargo fmt --check
  cargo clippy --workspace --all-targets -- -D warnings
  cargo nextest run --workspace
  cargo nextest run --workspace --profile fuzzy

All four shell results had exit code zero in the outside trace. Smith reported
1,449 focused tests and 17 fuzzy tests passing, then exited successfully on EOF.
The original ~/.local/state/smith chat was preserved; this trial used
/tmp/smith-project-session-ynw4vo7l and its trace.jsonl.

Changes remain uncommitted on fix/interactive-reliability-2026-10-08.
HEAD remains 6136dc4. Nothing was pushed or merged.

Causes found and fixes

1. A valid provider response.completed event exceeded the configured JSON
   parser token count: 1,036 tokens versus the old 1,024 limit. The captured
   event was approximately 12 KB; instructions, schemas and metadata count
   even when the assistant's actual answer is short. Standard receiving limits
   now accept the event, with a sanitized structural regression fixture.

2. The standard history limits were too small for a modest tool session.
   Requests could fail locally before reaching the provider after several
   tool calls or when restoring history. Raised bounded request, history,
   opaque reasoning, decoded-call and channel capacities together; a regression
   encodes 48 function-call/result pairs. Limits remain finite and checked.

3. The model could begin a generic brief before receiving the first terminal
   request. A message queued during preparation now becomes the opening user
   prompt and is acknowledged by its first actual turn. Without a queued
   message, an empty interactive brief explicitly asks the model to wait.

4. Terminal follow-ups were discarded during activation shutdown. Offering a
   message is not proof that the model read it. Smith retains the line until
   the turn's read watermark acknowledges its name, and carries an unread
   follow-up into the next activation with its original name. A state save
   must settle before the old answer completes. An ending-child message bounce
   is handled as an unread message instead of an agent failure. Regressions
   cover both an offered follow-up and a follow-up saved after the old answer,
   including a stale bounce. EOF drains already received lines.

5. Configured environment variables reached checks but not shell tools. Shell
   commands now inherit the explicitly configured defaults; per-command values
   override them. The merged environment is bounded and its memory is priced.
   Tests cover inheritance, overrides and refusal beyond the merged bound.

6. Listing "." produced an empty native path and failed. Root scans now map
   that path to ".". Tool guidance explains relative and named-directory paths.

7. Final reports lacked a newline. Reports now reserve a newline within the
   display cap, keeping the next terminal input separate.

Why the previous live suite missed this

Its stories covered refresh, a checked change, a separate invocation restoring
history, and optional push. They did not exercise a greeting followed by a
second request in the same terminal while the first child was shutting down.
The small scripted workloads also did not represent the actual completed-event
metadata or the accumulated history of a coding session. Forced startup-wait
instructions hid the generic-opening problem. Passing those stories did not
establish that the user's interactive workflow worked.

A new opt-in live story sends the test request as soon as the greeting's finish
call appears. It requires two finish calls, an actual shell call, the prescribed
test marker, the configured environment variable, unchanged test script and
unchanged git history. It reuses Skein's existing terminal and real harness.
The outcome checks now verify requested working files for report tasks too.

Validation

Formatting and workspace all-target Clippy passed. The final focused gate
passed 1,449/1,449 tests in 8.840 seconds; the fuzzy gate passed 17/17 in
7.532 seconds. Both stay within the existing 15-second and 60-second budgets.
The new Luna live interactive story passed in 31.787 seconds. These times
exclude builds. Serial measurements are recorded in docs/development/workflow.md.

Three coding tasks were assigned to Smith in disposable standalone fixtures:

  Python clamp: replace a broken implementation with inclusive bounds and
  ValueError for reversed bounds; Smith edited the function and ran five tests.

  Python unique_in_order: add a function that retains first occurrences,
  preserves order and does not mutate input; this was a second request in the
  same session, sent during the preceding finish. Smith edited the file and
  ran all nine tests. Both requests completed in 41.21 seconds, with two finish
  calls, no "Run failed", and process exit zero. An independent rerun passed
  all nine tests, and the test file's hash remained unchanged.

  Rust gcd: replace an incorrect sum with Euclid's algorithm; Smith used its
  read/edit/shell tools and ran cargo test --offline. All five tests passed,
  including zero and maximum-u64 cases. The session completed in 45.87 seconds
  and exited zero. An independent cargo test rerun also passed all five tests.

Relevant experiment artifacts:
  /tmp/smith-python-experiment-3.log
  /tmp/smith-experiment-i29jcyj7/trace.jsonl
  /tmp/smith-rust-experiment.log
  /tmp/smith-experiment-5bsrjymb/trace.jsonl
  /tmp/smith-live-interactive-3.log
  /tmp/smith-focused.log
  /tmp/smith-fuzzy.log
  /tmp/smith-clippy.log

Earlier live and multi-request trials reproduced the dropped-message failure;
those failed trials were followed by the successful runs above. A generic
"hello" can legitimately produce a waiting reply rather than finish; a trial
script that only waits for finish cannot grade that interaction. The actual
terminal flow and the new live story are the success evidence.

Configuration and running Smith

~/.config/smith/settings-codex.json selects gpt-6-luna / medium, a 64-turn,
600-second run budget, and explicit shell defaults including an empty
RUSTC_WRAPPER and CARGO_BUILD_JOBS=2. These avoid a stale cached build artifact
encountered during validation and limit concurrent compiler work. The checked
memory allowance was raised to accommodate the expanded finite capacities;
the printed worst-case value is an upper bound, not eager RAM allocation.

Credentials stay outside the repository. The importer copies the current
Codex access token only; it does not copy Codex's rotating refresh token.
Refresh the imported access token when needed, then run:

  python3 ~/.config/smith/import-codex-access.py
  cargo run --offline -p smith -- local ~/.config/smith/settings-codex.json ~/.local/state/smith

Scope of the result

These checks validate the requested workflow and the three coding tasks, not
unbounded histories or arbitrary projects. The full issuer-refresh and push
live stories were not claimed as passing in this session: validation selected
the interactive story and used a private access-only test record. No real
refresh token was copied and no remote push was performed.
